Add support for readonly members in structs (#673)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/classes.md

    | 'override'
    | 'abstract'
    | 'extern'

>     | 'readonly'

Reviewer: Should we add a comment like for unsafe code?

```suggestion
    | 'readonly'        // direct struct members only
```

Reviewer 2: I think we also need something here that order matters for these modifiers:

This is legal:

```csharp
public class C
{
    private int field;
    
    public ref readonly int M() 
    {
        return ref field;
    }
}
```

This is not:

```csharp
public class C
{
    private int field;
    
    public readonly ref int M()
    {
        return ref field;
    }
}
```

However, (changing the field to `static` for ref safety, both are legal for a `struct`:

```csharp
public struct C {
    private static int field;
    
    public ref readonly int M() {
        return ref field;
    }
}
```

And

```csharp
public struct C {
    private static int field;
    
    public readonly ref int M() {
        return ref field;
    }
}
```

Reviewer 3: `readonly ref readonly` also means a third, distinct, thing. The first `readonly` is saying something about the implicit `this` argument, while the `ref` and the second `readonly` are saying something about the returned value.

Reviewer 2: Issue:  Add a note to explain the order.

> *Note*: The overlapping of, and priority between, alternatives here is solely for descriptive convenience; the grammar rules could be elaborated to remove the overlap. ANTLR, and other grammar systems, adopt the same convenience and so *method_body* has the specified semantics automatically. *end note*

> A *method_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), `async` ([§15.15](classes.md#1515-async-functions)), and `readonly` modifiers.  However, it is a compile-time error for the *method_modifier* `readonly` to be used in a *method_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§cands-diffs-methods).

Reviewer 4: I think this is strictly correct due to specifying "the *method_modifier* `readonly`" - but it's still confusing, as at first glance this *looks* like it violates the rule... It's a *method_declaration* including `readonly`, after all. But it's not a "*method_modifier* `readonly`".

```csharp
class Test
{
    private int x;
    public ref readonly int GetXRef() => ref x;
}
````

It's only when it's part of a *method_modifier* that it's prohibited in a class. So this is only valid when `Test` is a struct, for example:

```csharp
struct Test
{
    private static int x;
    public readonly ref readonly int GetXRef() => ref x;
}
```

I'm not saying that's a good example of when `readonly` is usable, but it does highlight that `readonly` can occur twice in a single declaration with different meanings, which is a bit confusing. Perhaps that deserves a note as well?

Reviewer 2: Maybe a note is correct here. In the first example, `readonly` modifies the `int`. In the second, `readonly` modifies the *method_declaration*.

Reviewer 4: A note sounds like the way forward to me, particularly given your comment above from December 2024.

> A *method_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), `async` ([§15.15](classes.md#1515-async-functions)), and `readonly` modifiers.  However, it is a compile-time error for the *method_modifier* `readonly` to be used in a *method_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§cands-diffs-methods).

Reviewer: I suggest a slightly more positive rewording:

```suggestion
A *method_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)) and `async` ([§15.15](classes.md#1515-async-functions)). Additionally a  *method_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* may include the `readonly` modifier (§cands-diffs-methods).
```

    | 'override'
    | 'abstract'
    | 'extern'

>     | 'readonly'

Reviewer: Should we add a comment like for unsafe code?

```suggestion
    | 'readonly'        // direct struct members only
```

Reviewer 2: I think this is a great addition. Otherwise, I was thinking of suggesting two different productions for the modifiers to make it more clear that `readonly` was only allowed on direct members of a `struct` type. That felt a bit like overkill though.

Reviewer 2: Resolution: Go with the comment.

*unsafe_modifier* ([§23.2](unsafe-code.md#232-unsafe-contexts)) is only available in unsafe code ([§23](unsafe-code.md#23-unsafe-code)).

> A *property_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.7.2](classes.md#1572-static-and-instance-properties)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), and `readonly` modifiers. However, it is a compile-time error for the *property_modifier* `readonly` to be used in a *property_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (([§16.4.11](structs.md#16411-automatically-implemented-properties)).

Reviewer 2: We should specify that the `readonly` modifier can appear on an individual accessor (typically `get`) as well. The most common forms would be:

```csharp
public readonly int P => p; // readonly property

public int P2
{
    readonly get { return p; }
    set { p = value; }
}
```

Reviewer 2: ~~Also, in this and several related bullets, I'm curious why the adverb "directly" is needed? ~~

Kalle is right. Ignore this comment.

Reviewer 5: >  I'm curious why the adverb "directly" is needed?

```csharp
public struct S {
    public class C {
        public readonly int P => 0;
    }
}
```

The *property_declaration* of P is contained in the *struct_declaration* of S, but not directly, and `readonly` should not be allowed.

Reviewer 4: Meeting of 2025-05-14 - we think we probably need to add this, yes - we can't see where else it's specified.

Reviewer 4: My review 2025-06-02: I think this is still work to do. It may be simple enough to add within this PR, or we could create an issue - I don't mind which.

Reviewer 2: I added and updated this paragraph and the struct diffs section in this commit: https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/673/commits/fa8542a7347c8a79214ffd502895ff7bc4e8570a

> A *property_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.7.2](classes.md#1572-static-and-instance-properties)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), and `readonly` modifiers. However, it is a compile-time error for the *property_modifier* `readonly` to be used in a *property_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (([§16.4.11](structs.md#16411-automatically-implemented-properties)).

Reviewer: Same suggestion as for methods above:

```suggestion
A *property_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.7.2](classes.md#1572-static-and-instance-properties)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.7.6](classes.md#1576-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)) and `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)). Additionally a *property_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* may include the `readonly` modifier (§cands-diffs-methods).
```

    | 'internal' 'protected'
    | 'protected' 'private'
    | 'private' 'protected'

>     | 'readonly'

Reviewer: Should we add a comment like for unsafe code?

```suggestion
    | 'readonly'        // direct struct members only
```

The use of *accessor_modifier*s is governed by the following restrictions:

- An *accessor_modifier* shall not be used in an interface or in an explicit interface member implementation.

> - It is a compile-time error for the *accessor_modifier* `readonly` to be used in a *property_declaration* or *indexer_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§16.4.11, §cands-diffs-indexers).

Reviewer 2: I'd include accessors on this restriction. Either in this bullet, or as a separate bullet item.

Reviewer 5: The restriction in this bullet is only for accessors; it applies to *accessor_modifier*, rather than *property_modifier* or *indexer_modifier*.

Reviewer: I suggest:

```suggestion
- The *accessor_modifier* `readonly` may only be used in a *property_declaration* or *indexer_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§16.4.11, §cands-diffs-indexers).
```

Reviewer 4: Possibly "is permitted only" to match the following line?

Reviewer: @jskeet Good idea:

```suggestion
- The *accessor_modifier* `readonly` is permitted only in a *property_declaration* or *indexer_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§16.4.11, §cands-diffs-indexers).
```

    | 'override'
    | 'abstract'
    | 'extern'

>     | 'readonly'

Reviewer: Should we add a comment like for unsafe code?

```suggestion
    | 'readonly'        // direct struct members only
```

Reviewer 5: IIUC the comments on `unsafe` and pointer grammar are there because implementations are not required to support unsafe code.  That reason does not apply to `readonly`.

Reviewer: @KalleOlaviNiemitalo – yes & no. Comments are used in various places in the grammar to provide additional details and there are no hard & fast rules about them. In some cases there are different productions for differences small (e.g. *method_modifier*/*ref_method_modifier*) and sometimes not but with added text giving the rules and sometimes a comment in the production as well (e.g. *event_modifier* here).

To comment or not to comment here, that is the question ;-)

Reviewer 2: I think we should either:

1. Add the comment in all productions (line 3285, line 3371, *line 4031*, line 4302).
2. Make two productions for the modifiers: one for *<type-of-declaration>_class_modifier* and one for *<type-of-declaration>_struct_modifier* which adds `readonly` as an allowed modifier.

To discuss at the meeting.

*unsafe_modifier* ([§23.2](unsafe-code.md#232-unsafe-contexts)) is only available in unsafe code ([§23](unsafe-code.md#23-unsafe-code)).

> An *event_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods), [§15.8.4](classes.md#1584-static-and-instance-events)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), and `readonly` modifiers. However, it is a compile-time error for the *event_modifier* `readonly` to be used in an *event_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§cands-diffs-events).

Reviewer: Following my previous suggestions:

```suggestion
An *event_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods), [§15.8.4](classes.md#1584-static-and-instance-events)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)) and `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)) modifiers. Additionally an *event_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* may include the `readonly` modifier (§cands-diffs-methods).
```

*unsafe_modifier* ([§23.2](unsafe-code.md#232-unsafe-contexts)) is only available in unsafe code ([§23](unsafe-code.md#23-unsafe-code)).

> An *event_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `static` ([§15.6.3](classes.md#1563-static-and-instance-methods), [§15.8.4](classes.md#1584-static-and-instance-events)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods), [§15.8.5](classes.md#1585-virtual-sealed-override-and-abstract-accessors)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), and `readonly` modifiers. However, it is a compile-time error for the *event_modifier* `readonly` to be used in an *event_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§cands-diffs-events).

Reviewer 5: By the way, an `extern` event cannot work in .NET because its `add` and `remove` accessors cannot be explicitly declared and it is then not possible to decorate them with DllImportAttribute.  This however is not a defect of the C# standard because DllImportAttribute is not specified there.

    | 'override'
    | 'abstract'
    | 'extern'

>     | 'readonly'

Reviewer: Should we add a comment like for unsafe code?

```suggestion
    | 'readonly'        // direct struct members only
```

*unsafe_modifier* ([§23.2](unsafe-code.md#232-unsafe-contexts)) is only available in unsafe code ([§23](unsafe-code.md#23-unsafe-code)).

> An *indexer_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods)), `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)), and `readonly` modifiers. However, it is a compile-time error for the *indexer_modifier* `readonly` to be used in an *indexer_declaration* that is not contained directly by a *struct_declaration* (§cands-diffs-indexers).

Reviewer: As above:

```suggestion
An *indexer_declaration* may include a set of *attributes* ([§22](attributes.md#22-attributes)) and any one of the permitted kinds of declared accessibility ([§15.3.6](classes.md#1536-access-modifiers)), the `new` ([§15.3.5](classes.md#1535-the-new-modifier)), `virtual` ([§15.6.4](classes.md#1564-virtual-methods)), `override` ([§15.6.5](classes.md#1565-override-methods)), `sealed` ([§15.6.6](classes.md#1566-sealed-methods)), `abstract` ([§15.6.7](classes.md#1567-abstract-methods)) and `extern` ([§15.6.8](classes.md#1568-external-methods)) modifiers. Additionally an *indexer_declaration* that is contained directly by a *struct_declaration* may include the `readonly` modifier (§cands-diffs-methods).
```
